---
slug: 'why-and-how-you-should-protect-all-your-online-accounts'
title: 'Why (and How) you should protect all your online accounts'
published: '2021-02-11'
publishedHumanReadable: '02/11/2021'
lastModified: '2021-02-11'
author: 'Pietro Bondioli'
excerpt: '80% of all data breaches recorded in 2020 were caused by passwords that are weak or that were stolen in some way. Learn how to protect yourself using the apps Bitwarden and Authy.'
image: '/articles/passwords-and-digital-security.png'
imageAlt: 'A computer, a padlock and a key symbolizing the concept of digital security.'
twitterProfile: '@bondioli_pietro'
---

# **Why (and How) you should protect all your online accounts**

##### Feb 11, 2021 · 10 min reading - by Pietro Bondioli

According to “D.B.I.R.” report, published by the technology company Verizon, 80% of all data breaches recorded in 2020 were caused by passwords that are weak or that were stolen in some way. Statistically speaking, you are probably part of the group of people who are most vulnerable to a hacker attack, and it would only take a little effort (and computational power) for all of your accounts to fall into the hands of malicious people or groups.

It’s estimated that in 2018 and 2019 were produced 90% of all data ever generated by humanity in its history, people have never shared such amount of data and never had their privacy so weakened. This fragilization is caused by several factors, but what matters at this moment are the “users lack of information”, this article seeks to: remedy this lack of information by explaining the basics of information security in a simple way, and also present tools that can be used to improve users security.

## **Do people care about privacy? How much?**

The “Data Never Sleeps” report, published in 2017 by the technology company Domo, had estimated that in 2020, by every second, 1.7 megabytes of data was generated by each people, this “data” includes pictures/videos taken, messages exchanged, information about your internet activity, and many other kinds of data that you probably don’t want other people to have access to – but how much effort do you expend into actually securing this data?

According to “Consumer Account Security” report, published by the technology company Telesign, 80% of people worry about online security and 45% are extremely or very concerned about having their accounts and/or data stolen, however the same report shows that 73% of people use the same password in more than one account and 61% don’t have “two-step verification” enabled in any of their accounts. People are concerned about their online security and privacy, but for some reason not enough to take action to improve their account security.

One of the reasons cited for this lack of interest in their own security, is a lack of knowledge about how to protect themselves – the Telesign’s survey found that 72% of people would like guidance on how to secure their online accounts. What’s missing for people is access to simplified information on the subject.

## **Why you should care more about security?**

There is a lack of information on part of common users about how vulnerable they really are, the Telesign report pointed out that, even using repeated password across multiple accounts, 30% of people are extremely confident that their passwords will protect their accounts, but, as will be shown later, these people are not in fact secure.

One of the biggest security problems arises when, in addition to using weak passwords, people repeat the same passwords (or variations of it) across multiple accounts on the internet. As indicated in Telesign’s report, each user has an average of 24 online accounts, but use only 6 different passwords to protect all of them (each password is repeated, in average, 4 times), this can trigger off a problematic phenomenon called “Domino Effect of Password Reuse” – this phenomenon is called like this because once a malicious person and/or group has access to one of your passwords, it’s only a matter of time for all of your accounts to being compromised. For example:

Let’s say Mary has 24 online accounts, among them are:

- 1 Google account with the password: p1zz4maria
- 1 Twitter account with the password: 123p1zz4
- 1 Amazon account with the password: pizza123456
- 1 Habbo Hotel account with the password: pizza

Now imagine that the Habbo Hotel database has been compromised (or that Mary fell into an online scam) and now a malicious group know that the email and password of her Habbo account are, respectively, mary@gmail.com and “password”, these informations would be enough for them to gain access to all her other accounts, and it would only take a few hours, maybe minutes, since Mary uses repetitive passwords and doesn’t have enabled any kind of “two-factor authentication”.

Summarily, this “Domino Effect” is possible because once hackers have obtained the email address and password of an account , it becomes statistically feasible to attempt a brute-force attack (i.e. hacker technique that consists of generating a large amount of random passwords based on passed parameters, and attempting to make login with each of these passwords until get successful) on the other accounts that have been registered with that same email address.

## **How to protect yourself**

The most effective measures you can take are related to protecting each account individually with a good password and separating the protection of these accounts into layers, thus hampering account theft and the "Domino Effect". These measures will be presented in the following topics:

### **About password security**

The security of a password comes from its difficulty to be guessed by programs, in order to increase this difficulty you should pay attention to three factors: the amount and the types of characters used, and the password randomness/singularity.

#### **Amount and Types of characters used**

The first two factors are important because they will determine the amount of possible combinations of the password, the greater the number of possible combinations the stronger a password will be. So that we can well understand why this happens we need to have a basic notion about the Fundamental Counting Principle, which basically says that: “the total number of possibilities for an event to occur is given by the multiplication of all possibilities of each step that constitutes the event”. Exemplifying:

Let's say we have to create a password that is 2 characters long: in the first character we can use only the letters "A" or "B", and in the second character we can use only the letters "C", "D" or "E". If you try to figure out all the possible combinations for this password, you will find that there are six:

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Character at Position 1</th>
            <th>Character at Position 2</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>A</td>
            <td>C</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>A</td>
            <td>D</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>A</td>
            <td>E</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>B</td>
            <td>C</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>B</td>
            <td>D</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>B</td>
            <td>E</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

In this example we have that in Position 1 there are two possibilities, and in Position 2 there are three, applying the principle we get:

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Possibilities at Position 1</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>2 (“A” or “B”)</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Possibilities at Position 2</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>3 (“C”, “D” or “E”)</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th colSpan="2">Possible combinations:</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td colSpan="2">2 * 3 <strong>= 6</strong></td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

The more we increase the number of possible positions (password size) and the number of possibilities for each position (amount of possible characters), the greater the number of possible combinations.

Using this mathematical concept, we can calculate, for example, how many possible combinations an 16 characters password have:

We must consider that, normally, when we create a password, 94 characters are available:

- Numbers (10 different: 0-9)
- Letters (52 different: A-Z and a-z)
- Symbols (32 different)

So there are 16 possible positions (size) and 94 possibilities for each position. Multiplying the number of possibilities for each position we get:

**94 x 94 x 94 x 94 x 94 x 94 x 94 x 94 x 94 x 94 x 94 x 94**

This results in something around 37 Nonillion (number 37 followed by 30 zeros), which is a number of possibilities large enough to keep a computer busy for centuries.

To be considered a "challenge" for a computer, a password should be at least 12 characters long, but the ideal is to use at least 16 characters. Below you can see how long a simple computer would take to crack a password according to the number of characters:

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Password Size</th>
            <th>Character Time to be discovered</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>6</td>
            <td>3 hours</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>11</td>
            <td>33 years</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>12</td>
            <td>4 centuries</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>16</td>
            <td>more than 10.000 centuries</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

#### **Password Randomness and Singularity**

The "randomness" and "uniqueness" factors are important since they make it difficult to use certain techniques in a brute-force attack. It occurs because these attacks are usually done smartly, the first passwords tested are combinations of dictionary words, proper names, user information, common passwords and passwords leaked in hacker attacks – if the password are random and unique the probability of it being discovered using this kind of technique are minimal.

These factors are complementary, once a password has been randomly generated, it will most likely meet the requirement of being unique, this happens because it’s very unlikely that, among the vast amount of possible password combinations, someone has randomly generated a password just like yours. This is why it’s recommended to use automatic generators to create your passwords – in the topic “Tools” we will discuss how to use these generators.

### **About layering your account protection**

The separation of account security in “layers” basically consists of two points: use different email accounts for each type of online service used, and enable the “two-factor authentication” on all of your accounts. Explaining the importance of each point:

#### **Using different email accounts**

The simplest way to add a layer on your account security is to use different email accounts for each purpose. For example:

Let’s say that John uses internet for 4 clearly distinct purposes:

- Use social networks
- Shop online
- Store photos and another medias
- Exchange work-related emails

It’s recommended that John creates an email for each of these purposes, so that if the email he uses to work, for example, get hacked, the hackers will not find a “pot of gold” with all of John's information in one place – his photos, shopping information and his social interactions will remain safe. For this method to be effective, each of these emails needs to be protected by good (random and unique) passwords and the “two-factor authentication” should be enabled.

#### **Two Factory Authentication**

Making use of "two-factor authentication" (also called "two-step authentication" or “2FA”) is extremely effective at securing your accounts, 2FA basically consists of adding an extra step in the login process. How it works:

Imagine you are trying to log in to your Facebook account, normally you would just fill in the email and password fields and click the login button (Facebook's "Log In" button), but with two-step authentication enabled, before you login to your account, Facebook would ask you for an authentication code that they sent you via sms, email, or by some other means.

This feature is good for your security because even if some person and/or group has knowledge of your passwords, no one will be able to access any of your accounts, since before any login attempt you are asked for a code that is randomly generated and changes every attempt (or every X seconds). To manage all your accounts that have 2FA enabled there are several free and secure applications that keep your authentication codes safe and easily accessible to you if you have a smartphone, in the next topic you will find an explanation of how to use these applications.

## **Tools that can help you protect yourself**

In short, we have seen that to effectively protect our online accounts we need to:

- Use strong and unique passwords for each account (randomly generated)
- Separate account security in layers (mainly using 2FA)

But while trying to fulfill these requirements we can run into problems. For example, when we create strong and unique passwords for each account, how can we memorize them all? Or also, with two-factor authentication enabled, how to know where your verification code will arrive? And if I change my cell phone number? How can I receive the verification code via SMS if I no longer have access to the old number? To help us get over these problems there are free and secure applications/services we can use:

- For account/password management we can use BitWarden, an application that, in addition to being free for all platforms (PC and Mobile), is also completely transparent with the community
- For managing and integrating all accounts with two-factor authentication we can use Authy, a free application for all platforms, that is very intuitive for those who are going to use it for the first time

### **BitWarden**

BitWarden, besides storing all your credentials securely, will also help you:

- Generating random and unique passwords
- Auto-filling login forms

And the main thing about the tool is that you will be able to create accounts using random and unique passwords without having the problem of having to remember each one, since once logged into the BitWarden application you can use the auto-fill feature, or you can copy the password of each registered account, so the only password you will need to remember is the BitWarden Master Password.

#### **BitWarden Tutorial**

If you are using cell phones or any other mobile device (cell phones, tablets, etc) you can follow the same steps by downloading the BitWarden app from the Google or IOS (Apple) app store.

1. First you must create a BitWarden account:
   1. Access <a href="https://www.bitwarden.com/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">https://www.bitwarden.com/</a> and click on Start a Free Trial or Log In.
   2. If you have clicked Log In now you must click Create Account.
   3. In the account creation screen fill in the requested data:
      1. Enter your primary email address and your name.
      2. Use <a href="https://www.lastpass.com/password-generatoren.com/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">https://www.lastpass.com/password-generator</a> to randomly generate your Master Password:
         - When generating your password use at least 16 characters in “length”, it is important because this password will protect all your other passwords, so it needs to be strong. The site gives you the option to create an "easy to pronounce", "easy to read" or "all characters" password, choose the one of your preference.
         - I recommend that you write down your email and master password on a piece of paper and keep it somewhere safe in your home (since you may forget your password).
      3. In the “password hint” field you can put anything (or simply with a reminder of where the paper with the passwords written is).
   4. After creating your account you will be redirected to your BitWarden vault, there you will see a notification asking you to confirm your email:
      1. Click the "send email" button on the notification.
      2. Check your email account inbox, there you will find an email from BitWarden with a confirmation link, click on this link to confirm your account.
   5. That's it! Your vault has been created!
2. Download the BitWarden application/program/extension on the platforms where you will use the tool. At <a href="https://www.bitwarden.com/download/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">https://www.bitwarden.com/download/</a> you can find download links for many different platforms/systems.
3. Independently of which platform you are using BitWarden on, three tabs will be available by default in the applications:
   1. My Vault: on this tab you will see all the credentials/passwords/accounts you have stored in your vault.
   2. Generator/Tools: in this tab you’ll find a tool for generating random and unique passwords, whenever you create a new account on any site use this tool to generate your password.
   3. Settings: a tab with various configuration options for your Extension, your Vault and your BitWarden Account.
4. On all platforms you will have the same basic features available:
   1. You can manually add new credentials to your vault by clicking on the "+" button, when clicking on the button a form with some fields will appear:
      1. The "type" field is the type of credential you want to save, in this case we are registering online accounts, so leave "credential" checked.
      2. The "name" field refers to the name you want to give that credential, put whatever you think is best, in my case I always write something like "Email Main Account" or “Email Secondary Account”.
      3. The "username" and "password" fields are the credentials you want to save.
      4. The "URI" or "URL" field refers to the websites these credentials are from, for example if you are registering a gmail credential you should fill in this field with "gmail.com".
      5. The other fields are irrelevant at this point, you can just leave them as they are by default.
   2. You can access all credentials stored in your vault and copy the "username" or "password" of any credential at any time.
   3. An automatic password generation tool that can be used to generate random and unique passwords according to your chosen options, you can choose the password size, character types used, among other options.
5. If you want to use BitWarden in a web browser:
   1. At the <a href="https://www.bitwarden.com/download/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">link passed in topic 2</a> you will find links to install the extension in eight different Browsers (Google Chrome, Firefox, Opera, Microsoft Edge, Safari, Vivaldi, Brave and Tor Browser), click on the link that corresponds to your browser and install the extension.
   2. With the extension installed click on the icon (a white and blue shield) that will appear in your browser toolbar and login with your BitWarden account.
   3. After logging in we will see that now there is 4 tabs within the extension window:
      1. The three standard tabs.
      2. A tab called "Tab" where all the saved credentials for the site you are currently on will be shown.
   4. By making use of the extension the following additional functionality will be available: 3. Every time you make login or create a new account the extension will ask you to save your credentials, you just have to click "yes". 4. If you have already saved login credentials from some site, whenever you login again to that site just click on the extension icon (blue and white shield), go to the "Tab" section, and click on the saved credential, it will fill the login formulary automatically.
6. If you want to use BitWarden on a mobile device:
   1. At the <a href="https://www.bitwarden.com/download/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">link passed in topic 2</a> you will find links to install the application on both Android or IOS (Apple), or you can also simply search for "BitWarden" in the "AppStore" or "PlayStore" and install it.
   2. With the app already installed, open the application and make login with your email address and your master password.
   3. In the case of mobile devices you also have the auto-fill feature, but it must be enabled:
      1. Open the app and go to the "Settings" tab.
      2. Activate the "Autofill Service" and the "Autofill Accessibility Service".
   4. If your device has a biometric reader (fingerprint reader) you can use this to unlock your BitWarden vault, eliminating the need to write your master password every time:
      1. Open the app and go to the "Settings" tab.
      2. Look for the "Unlock with Biometrics" option and click to activate it.
7. The "BitWarden" PC/Notebook application has no extra features worth mentioning.

### **Authy**

Authy is an authenticator app, meaning that it will work as an external factor for the authenticating process (login) of any account where two-factor authentication (2FA) is enabled and configured. One feature that makes this app stand out compared to other authentication apps, such as "Google Authenticator", is the ability to connect your Authy account on multiple devices, and the ability of backup your Authy account – which is very useful in case you get stolen, lose your device, etc.

#### **Authy Tutorial**

Although there is a PC/Notebook application, this tutorial will only cover using the application on mobile devices.

1. Download the Authy application to your Android or IOS mobile device:
   1. At <a href="https://www.authy.com/download/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">https://www.authy.com/download/</a> you can find download links for many different platforms/systems. You can also find the app in the "AppStore" or "PlayStore" simply by searching for "Authy", the full name of the app in those stores is "Twilio Authy" or "Twilio Authy 2-Factor Authentication".
2. Open the application and register using your cell phone number and email address:
   1. The application will ask you to confirm a code received via SMS or Call on your cell phone, I recommend choosing the SMS option.
   2. The email and cell phone used to register can be changed later if necessary.
3. Create a backup password for your account, this protects your Authy account and allows you to backup your account:
   1. In the application, click on the 3 little dots and open the "Settings" menu.
   2. Go to the "Accounts" tab and search for "Backups”.
   3. Enable the "Backups" feature and put a good backup password:
      1. Use the BitWarden password generator to create a random and unique password:
         - I recommend that you write down the Authy backup password on a piece of paper and keep it in a safe place, just like you did with the BitWarden master password, it is essential that you never lose either one.
4. Enable two-factor authentication on any account using the application:
   1. Go to the website of the account that you want to activate 2FA (for example: Twitter, Facebook, etc.).
   2. Go into your account settings and look under "account security" sections for the option of enable two-step verification.
   3. Enable 2FA and choose to use an "Authenticating Application" as the method.
   4. The site will provide you with a QR code or a character code.
   5. Login to the Authy app, open the options menu and click Add Account.
   6. The app will give you two options:
      1. Scan QR code.
      2. Enter the code manually.
   7. If you have the QR code on some screen just scan it, or if you only have the character code at hand just type it and click Save.
   8. Now you have that account registered with Authy, whenever you make login to that site and are asked for an authentication code you can open the application and see the code related to that account:
      1. Remember that the code is updated every 30 seconds for security reasons, so there is no point in trying to memorize this authentication code to use later.

After reading these two tutorials, you now have an idea of how to use these two applications to increase the security of all your accounts and at the same time decrease the number of passwords you have to remember. To complement all of this I will only point out a few things:

- Once you have created your Authy account, use the app to enable two-step verification on your BitWarden account, that way your protection is complete.
- After you have created BitWarden and Authy accounts take some time and improve your passwords and enable 2FA on all the accounts you already have, this will take you 1-2 hours but can prevent a lot of problems in the future.
- Write down the BitWarden Master Password and the Authy Backup Password (along with the emails and phone numbers used to create the accounts) on at least more than one piece of paper, and keep them in different places, this will save you a lot of headaches.
- The master password of your BitWarden account should not be shared with anyone, this is one of the most recurrent reasons for data leaks.
- It is not recommended that you login with your BitWarden account on an unknown device, such as university computers, library computers, etc.

## **Conclusion**

People are increasingly vulnerable on the internet, the use of weak passwords and the non-use of security tools – such as two-factor authentication – are two of the main causes of this lack of security. This article briefly presented the weakest links within information security and what you can do to strengthen these links in an easy way. If you've followed all the steps here, you're probably better protected and have a better sense of digital security than most users. For those interested in learning more about online security, I will leave suggestions for articles that delve deeper into some of the topics covered in this article.

## **References**

1. Verizon Communications. D.B.I.R. - Data Breach Investigations Report. 2020. Available at: <<a href="https://www.enterprise.verizon.com/resources/reports/dbir/2020/" target="_blank"  rel="noopener">https://www.enterprise.verizon.com/resources/reports/dbir/2020/</a>>. Accessed: 24 January 2021.
2. IBM. Big Data Challenge Opportunity. 2020. Available at: <<a href="https://www.ibm.com/watson/infographic/discovery/big-data-challenge-opportunity/" target="_blank"  rel="noopener">https://www.ibm.com/watson/infographic/discovery/big-data-challenge-opportunity/</a>>. Accessed: 24 January 2021.
3. TeleSign. Consumer Account Security Report. 2015. Available at: <<a href="https://www.ts.telesign.com/hubfs/Downloadable%20Assets/Whitepapers-Eguides-Reports/Report%20-%20TeleSign%20Consumer%20Account%20Security%20Report%20-%20EN.pdf" target="_blank"  rel="noopener">https://www.ts.telesign.com/hubfs/Downloadable%20Assets/Whitepapers-Eguides-Reports/Report%20-%20TeleSign%20Consumer%20Account%20Security%20Report%20-%20EN.pdf</a>>. Accessed: 26 January 2021.
4. Domo Inc. data never sleeps 6.0. 2017. Available at: <<a href="https://www.domo.com/assets/downloads/18**domo**data-never-sleeps-6+verticals.pdf" target="_blank"  rel="noopener">https://www.domo.com/assets/downloads/18\*\*domo\*\*data-never-sleeps-6+verticals.pdf</a>>. Accessed: 26 January 2021.

---

> _"Life is very short and anxious for those who forget the past, neglect the present, and fear the future." — Seneca_

---
